---
layout: page
title: Introduction > CALOHEE  Learning Outcomes Reference Framework
permalink: /calohee/
show_sidebar: false
menubar: menu
toc: true
toc_title:  Introduction > CALOHEE  Learning Outcomes Reference Framework
hero_height: is-small
---
## About

CALOHEE offers a template and menu as to what can be learned in the
context of a degree programme in a given subject area (in our case:
History), so as to provide clarity and guidance for programme design,
delivery and quality assurance. The Learning Outcomes Reference
Framework is a set of general descriptors organised on the basis of
‘dimensions’. A dimension indicates a constructive key element, which
defines a subject area. Each subject area is based on a multiple of
dimensions meant to serve as a sound basis for defining the *programme
learning outcomes* of individual degree programmes of the first and
second cycle (Bachelor and Master).

For History the dimensions are defined as following:

Dimension 1) Human beings: cultures and societies;

Dimension 2) Texts and contexts;

Dimension 3) Theories and Concepts;

Dimension 4) Interdisciplinarity;

Dimension 5) Initiative and Creativity;

Dimension 6) Communication;

Dimension 7) Professional Development.

The Assessment Reference Framework offers a breakdown of the
subject area general descriptors in measurable learning outcomes
statements, normally each dimension contains from 1 to 4 sub-dimensions.

As for the purposes of the ENCODE project we have focused on Dimension
2) Text and contexts and to the specific learning outcomes statements of
the Assessment Reference Framework related to this dimension. For
graduates in the Humanities, concentrating on ancient writing cultures,
this is the most relevant Dimension as for knowledge and knowledge
application.

Beside the focus on specific specialised knowledge we have also
considered learning outcomes which address the most relevant transversal
competences necessary to bridge with the Digital dimension and namely
Dimension 4) Interdisciplinarity, Dimension 5) Initiative and creativity
and Dimension 6) Communication.

The CALOHEE Framework targets the design of programmes at the level 6
and 7 of the European Qualification Framework for LifeLong Learning (EQF
for LLL) and takes into account both the EQF descriptors and the
descriptors for first and second cycle of the Framework for
Qualifications of the European Higher Education Area. In fact while the
QF for the EHEA distinguishes for the first and second cycle five
dimensions (the so called Dublin Descriptors), ranging from knowledge to
lifelong learning, the current EQF for LLL makes a distinction between
three elements, ‘knowledge’, ‘skills’ and ‘autonomy and responsibility’.
The CALOHEE Framework combines and reconciles the two different
approaches into a matrix.

For the purposes of our work we have considered the CALOHEE descriptors
for level 6 (First Cycle - Bachelor) as ‘entrance’ competences for the
ENCODE Intensive Training, while we have referred to the Dig.Comp 2.2
Framework to define the specific competences to be provided during the
training.

In the feedback questionnaires on training results however, non
surprisingly, we have noticed that hands on training on Digital
competences has generated an improvement also in the subject specific
competences producing more awareness of the discipline (Epigraphy,
Papyrology, Codicology etc.) methodology, deep understanding of the
writings aspects and textual criticism including the material and
contextualisation aspects and enhancement of the heuristic, analytic and
interpretive skills.

As entry requirements for our training we have thus adapted the
descriptors in appendix.