---
layout: page
title: ENCODE Database
permalink: /competences/
show_sidebar: false
menubar: menu
toc: true
toc_title: ENCODE Database
hero_height: is-small
---

## The ENCODE competences

Training materials have been collected and organised on the basis of a
definition of competences and learning outcomes aligned to international
reference frameworks. The competences’ choice has been developed in
consultation with stakeholders who have designed or have participated in
training events aimed at providing innovative digital competences to
graduates and scholars specialised in the study of ancient written
documents.

The result of the consultation is available in two reports published on
the ENCODE website:
[<u>https://site.unibo.it/encode/en/outputs</u>](https://site.unibo.it/encode/en/outputs):
the first, by Birgit Breuer, *Report on digital competences, learning
outcomes and best practices in teaching and learning* has focused mainly
on the trainer perspective, while the second, by Marta Fogagnolo, *Hands
on workshops. ENCODE report on digital competences, learning outcomes
and best practices in teaching and learning* (published as well at: DOI:
[<u>10.6092/unibo/amsacta/7046</u>](http://doi.org/10.6092/unibo/amsacta/7046))
has focused mostly on the trainee perspective, starting from focus
groups and surveys with participants to the ENCODE training events.

The shared views resulting from this have informed the design of basic
and advanced teaching modules and of the
[<u>database</u>](https://gn.biblhertz.it/encode/index.html) collecting
teaching materials and examples of training activities, the reports have
also been the basis for the design of the
[<u>MOOC</u>](https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13010043).

Existing surveys on subject specific and transversal competences as well
as shared reference points at European level on expected learning
outcomes do usually focus on the level of programmes and areas of study,
while in this case we produced a specific report to be used within
innovative and compact transnational training activities targeted at
bridging the gap between very specific and specialistic humanistic
training and emerging new areas of competence in the Digital Humanities
and in the field of Artificial Intelligence. While research exists which
details the necessity or the structure of training in this area
([<u>Bodard and Stoyanova 2016</u>](http://dx.doi.org/10.5334/bat),
[<u>Parker et al. 2019</u>](https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004399297_011)),
no systematic report exists which crosses several national contexts,
neither one that includes the point of view of students and employees.

In the last years, within the European Area of Higher Education and
within the European Union strategy of LifeLong Learning, a growing
attention has been devoted to competence frameworks and to definition
key competences as a way, on one hand, to facilitate convergence in
Education, on the other hand as a way to ‘support and reinforce the
development of key competences from an early age and throughout life,
for all individuals, as part of national lifelong learning strategies’,
with the awareness that ‘a shared and updated understanding of key
competences is a first step for fostering education, training and
non-formal learning in Europe’. \[COUNCIL RECOMMENDATION of 22 May 2018
on key competences for lifelong learning (2018/C 189/01).

More specifically, we have considered two main Reference Frameworks:

1.  Since we target HE graduates in the Humanities, with a special focus
    for disciplines dealing with ancient written objects, we have
    taken into account the Subject Area Learning Outcomes / Assessment
    Reference Framework in Higher Education for History produced
    within the EU Erasmus+ funded project *Measuring and Comparing
    Achievements of Learning Outcomes in Europe* - **CALOHEE**
    \[[<u>https://www.calohee.eu/</u>](https://www.calohee.eu/)\]

2.  Since we want to improve and bridge specialised knowledge with the
    suitable digital competences needed by new profiles of graduates,
    we have taken into account the **DigComp.** *The Digital
    Competence Framework for Citizens* in its 2.1 and 2.2 version.
    URI:
    [<u>https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415</u>](https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415)
    DOI: [<u>10.2760/115376
    (online)</u>](https://dx.doi.org/10.2760/115376),
    <u>[10.2760/490274 (print)](https://dx.doi.org/10.2760/490274)</u>
    connecting it with more specific reflections arising from pilot
    training carried out by the EpiDoc community (the community of
    scholars active in digital edition of Inscriptions and papyri)

### The CALOHEE Subject Area Learning Outcomes / Assessment Reference Framework

CALOHEE offers a template and menu as to what can be learned in the
context of a degree programme in a given subject area (in our case:
History), so as to provide clarity and guidance for programme design,
delivery and quality assurance. The <u>Learning Outcomes Reference
Framework</u> is a set of general descriptors organised on the basis of
‘dimensions’. A dimension indicates a constructive key element, which
defines a subject area. Each subject area is based on a multiple of
dimensions meant to serve as a sound basis for defining the *programme
learning outcomes* of individual degree programmes of the first and
second cycle (Bachelor and Master).

For History the dimensions are defined as following:

Dimension 1) Human beings: cultures and societies;

Dimension 2) Texts and contexts;

Dimension 3) Theories and Concepts;

Dimension 4) Interdisciplinarity;

Dimension 5) Initiative and Creativity;

Dimension 6) Communication;

Dimension 7) Professional Development.

The <u>Assessment Reference Framework</u> offers a breakdown of the
subject area general descriptors in measurable learning outcomes
statements, normally each dimension contains from 1 to 4 sub-dimensions.

As for the purposes of the ENCODE project we have focused on Dimension
2) Text and contexts and to the specific learning outcomes statements of
the Assessment Reference Framework related to this dimension. For
graduates in the Humanities, concentrating on ancient writing cultures,
this is the most relevant Dimension as for knowledge and knowledge
application.

Beside the focus on specific specialised knowledge we have also
considered learning outcomes which address the most relevant transversal
competences necessary to bridge with the Digital dimension and namely
Dimension 4) Interdisciplinarity, Dimension 5) Initiative and creativity
and Dimension 6) Communication.

The CALOHEE Framework targets the design of programmes at the level 6
and 7 of the European Qualification Framework for LifeLong Learning (EQF
for LLL) and takes into account both the EQF descriptors and the
descriptors for first and second cycle of the Framework for
Qualifications of the European Higher Education Area. In fact while the
QF for the EHEA distinguishes for the first and second cycle five
dimensions (the so called Dublin Descriptors), ranging from knowledge to
lifelong learning, the current EQF for LLL makes a distinction between
three elements, ‘knowledge’, ‘skills’ and ‘autonomy and responsibility’.
The CALOHEE Framework combines and reconciles the two different
approaches into a matrix.

For the purposes of our work we have considered the CALOHEE descriptors
for level 6 (First Cycle - Bachelor) as ‘entrance’ competences for the
ENCODE Intensive Training, while we have referred to the Dig.Comp 2.2
Framework to define the specific competences to be provided during the
training.

In the feedback questionnaires on training results however, non
surprisingly, we have noticed that hands on training on Digital
competences has generated an improvement also in the subject specific
competences producing more awareness of the discipline (Epigraphy,
Papyrology, Codicology etc.) methodology, deep understanding of the
writings aspects and textual criticism including the material and
contextualisation aspects and enhancement of the heuristic, analytic and
interpretive skills.

As entry requirements for our training we have thus adapted the
descriptors in appendix.

### The DigComp 2.2 Framework

This framework addresses digital transformation and is aimed at
providing a shared definition of digital competences. DigComp, as the
EU-wide framework for developing and measuring digital competences in
March 2022, has been published in its 2.2 version, which takes into
account developments in the field of AI as well. DigComp 2.2, is
considered a wider reference framework for citizens’ competences and
does not target specific levels of Education, but nevertheless provides
a useful basis for educational innovation, taking into account the
labour market and societal changes.

The DigComp conceptual model is based on a matrix of five dimensions
(information and data literacy; communication and collaboration; digital
content creation; safety; problem-solving) with four progressive overall
levels (foundation, intermediate, advanced, and highly specialised),
articulated in eight granular levels. This matrix is independent of
qualifications, and levels are built on three main areas of mastery: (1)
complexity of tasks, (2) autonomy, and (3) cognitive domain
(remembering, understanding, applying, evaluating, and creating).

For our purposes we have focused mainly on the areas of Competence 1:
Information and data literacy (level 5 to 6), 2: Communication and
collaboration (level 4 to 6), 3: Digital content creation (level 4 to
6), 5: Problem solving (level 4 to 5)

For some training we have also included area 4: Safety at level 3.

The Learning outcomes which we used to plan our trainings as well as the
competences which were required or achieved are listed in the detailed
documents of the training events:

[<u>https://site.unibo.it/encode/en/training-events</u>](https://site.unibo.it/encode/en/training-events)
and summarised here below in the two appendixes.


## Appendix 1: Competences required as entry requirements for the training activities designed and delivered within the ENCODE project

The Learning outcomes are aligned with the CALOHEE History Reference and Assessment Framework - Level 6.

**Training activities**

-   Encode Digital Greek And Latin Epigraphy Workshop - Bologna, January 25-29 2021.
    

-   Linked Open Data for Written Artefacts Intensive Training - Hamburg, May 26–28 2021.
    

-   ENCODE Training workshop Multilingual and Multicultural Digital Infrastructures for Ancient Written Artefacts - Leuven, November 2-5, 2021.


-   ENCODE Winter School “Papyrology for non-specialists” - Würzburg, February 14-17, 2022.


-   ENCODE Digital Papyrology Workshop - Parma, May 24-27 2022.


-   Oslo ENCODE Intensive Training Workshop: Building a MySQL Relational Database for Your Data - Oslo, October 10-13 2022.
   

-   ENCODE Workshop ‘AI and ancient writing cultures’ - Bologna, January 23-27 2023.
    

**DIMENSION 2 - TEXT AND CONTEXT**

**2.1 SOURCE IDENTIFICATION: IDENTIFY RELEVANT HISTORICAL DATA
/PROBLEMS, PEOPLE, PLACES.**

-   Know the use of ancient documents as historical sources; define and
    describe the different types of texts in relation with the support
    and identify relevant research areas/problems they may contribute.

-   Know how to find relevant information for interpreting ancient
    documents and relating them to the main problems and themes of
    epigraphy and /or papyrology (or other specific disciplines).

**2.2 SOURCE RETRIEVAL - METADATA CATALOGUING PRACTICES:**

-   Can read a lemma and understand catalogue information about origin,
    provenance, editions, analysis of material support, present
    location of documents.

-   Can retrieve editions, origin, provenance, conservation history
    through the main paper-based and digital corpora, reference tools
    and digital infrastructures related to Greek and Roman epigraphy
    and papyrology and /or other ancient documents related sciences.

-   Can use independently and critically inventories, catalogues,
    electronic resources to locate and evaluate needed data and source
    material and organise them to address research problems.

**2.3 SOURCE ANALYSIS - TRANSCRIPTION, CRITICAL EDITION, AND
INTERPRETATION:**

-   Know and are able to apply linguistic, paleographical and editorial
    skills to date, decipher transcribe and edit a document.

-   Can apply source critique to a group of sources according to the
    concept of ancient archive, dossier and can locate meaningful
    parallels for interpreting different problems.

-   Can analyse different aspects of an original inscription or papyrus
    and identify the relevance of the document for specific research
    questions.

**2.4 CONTEXTUALIZATION OF SOURCE PRODUCTION AND TRANSMISSION –
PRESERVATION HISTORY / HISTORICAL CONTEXT:**

-   Can understand and identify the different contexts (institutional,
    archaeological, museological etc.) that may have determined the
    formation and preservation of the ancient documents.

-   Can handle metadata with relevant information about the history of
    the document including context of production and history of
    finding and preservation;.

-   Can organise data about the different contexts (institutional,
    archaeological, museological etc.) which have determined the
    formation and preservation of the Greek and Roman inscriptions and
    papyri (and /or other kinds of ancient documents) and use them
    towards a research project.

**DIMENSION 4: INTERDISCIPLINARITY**

-   Can understand relations among different fields of study (epigraphy,
    philology, archaeology, linguistics), methods and tools of the
    digital domain.

-   Can approach problems from different points of view.

-   Are aware of methods of different areas of research with ancient
    documents and of critical and methodological skills involved
    (philology, linguistics, history, archaeology).

-   Can utilise the information obtained using different method(s) from
    related sciences and present a coherent and relevant analysis to
    specialist and non-specialist audiences.

-   Participate effectively in an interdisciplinary group helping to
    coordinate and deploy knowledge and insights from different
    fields.

**DIMENSION 5: COMMUNICATION**

-   Linguistic abilities: demonstrate a reading knowledge of Greek and
    Latin or other ancient languages and specificities of use of the
    language in documents of different nature.

-   Are able to read editions and commentaries in a second or more modern
    language(s).

**DIMENSION 6: INITIATIVE AND CREATIVITY**

-   Understand the dialogic nature of the humanities within scientific
    and public debate: approach issues with critical awareness; think
    in scientific terms; pose problems.

-   Can identify problems or interpretations debated in source edition
    and interpretation for which one’s research can offer useful
    evidence and insight.

-   Can compare and connect different solutions to the same problem.

*For some specific training we have also added the following
dimensions:*

**ENCODE Training workshop Multilingual and Multicultural Digital
Infrastructures for Ancient Written Artefacts**

**DIMENSION 7: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT**

-   Understand how historical research or debates have affected
    societies in different times and keep up to date about current
    developments in historical research and debates.

**ENCODE Training workshop Multilingual and Multicultural Digital
Infrastructures for Ancient Written Artefacts**

**DIMENSION 1: HUMAN BEINGS - CULTURES AND SOCIETIES**

**1.5 INTERCULTURAL ENCOUNTERS:**

-   Demonstrate specific knowledge about intercultural encounters and
    their consequences in every field of human activities. Integrate
    different dimensions (social, cultural, political, religious,
    linguistic) in cultural encounters.

-   Are able to organise effective collaboration in multicultural
    context, demonstrating critical appraisal and skills of cultural
    mediation.

**ENCODE Workshop ‘AI and ancient writing cultures’**

**DIM. 3: THEORIES AND CONCEPTS**

**3.1 WORKING WITH THEORIES AND METHODS**

-   Can apply appropriate theoretical and clear conceptual approaches to
    humanities research.


## Appendix 2: Competences for the training activities designed and delivered in the
ENCODE project from CALOHEE History Reference and Assessment Framework -
Level 6.

**COMPETENCE AREA 1: INFORMATION AND DATA LITERACY**

**1.1 BROWSING, SEARCHING AND FILTERING**

-   can use independently and critically multilingual digital corpora
    and can evaluate and adapt and vary searching strategies to find
    the most appropriate data, information and content in digital
    corpora and databases, can guide others in browsing, searching and
    filtering data, information and digital content (DigComp2.1: 1.1
    level 6)

**1.2 EVALUATING DATA AND INFORMATION**

-   can critically assess sources of metadata and digital editions of
    ancient text, related information and digital content and relating
    them to the main problems and themes of epigraphy and /or
    papyrology (or other specific disciplines) (DigComp2.1 / 1.2 level
    6).

**1.3 MANAGING DATA, INFORMATION AND DIGITAL CONTENT**

-   is aware of the problems connected with the management of
    information related to multicultural contexts, data and content
    for the most appropriate easy retrieval and storage. Can manage
    xml files (through editors like Oxygen, Atom) and is aware of /
    can contribute to digital platforms and tools for managing digital
    publication / adapt information about ancient documents to be
    organised and processed in the most appropriate structured
    environment (EFES, TEI-Publisher, Oxygen XML Editor project)
    (DigComp2.1 / 1.3 level 4/6).

**COMPETENCE AREA 2: COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION**

**2.1 INTERACTING THROUGH DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES**

-   can interact through a variety of digital technologies and
    understand appropriate digital communication means for a given
    multicultural context (DigComp2.1 / 2.1 level 4/5).

**2.2 SHARING THROUGH DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES**

-   can share data, information and digital content with others through
    appropriate digital technologies. Know about referencing and
    attribution practices (DigComp2.1 / 2.2 level 4/5).

**2.4 COLLABORATING THROUGH DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES**

-   can use digital tools and technologies for collaborative processes
    and for co-construction and co-creation of data, resources and
    knowledge (e.g. online editing through Google drive, cloud, wiki,
    conceive and apply agreed rules in complex projects) (DigComp2.1 /
    2.4 level 5/6).

**2.5 NETIQUETTE**

-   are aware of behavioural norms and know-how while using digital
    technologies and interacting in multicultural digital
    environments. Can adapt communication strategies to the specific
    audience and to be aware of cultural and generational diversity in
    digital environments. (DigComp2.1/2.5 level 5).

**COMPETENCE AREA 3: DIGITAL CONTENT CREATION**

**3.1 DEVELOPING DIGITAL CONTENT**

-   Can understand the structure of digital content / Can create and
    edit digital content in different formats (e.g. ways to create and
    edit a digital edition through XML language) (DigComp2.1/3.1 level
    4/5 to 5/6).

**3.2 INTEGRATING AND RE-ELABORATING DIGITAL CONTENT**

-   can modify, refine, improve and integrate information and content
    into an existing body of knowledge can create new, original and
    relevant continent t and knowledge.

-   (DigComp2.1/3.2 level 5)

**3.4 PROGRAMMING**

-   can plan and develop a sequence of understandable instructions for a
    computer to solve a given problem or perform a specific task (e.g.
    give instruction through XML for searching XML database dnd and
    XPath and XSLT for transforming XML files). (DigComp2.1/3.3 level
    4/5).

**4 SAFETY**

**4.1 PROTECTING DEVICES AND DIGITAL CONTENT**

-   Are aware of copyright about ancient documents (photographs, museum
    rights, printed and digital editions), different kinds of online
    copyright and data protection (Creative Commons, OpenAccess,
    Linked Open Data) (DigComp2.¼..1 level 4).

-   Can recognise and indicate the environmental impacts of the storage
    and maintenance of databases and online graphic users interface
    (DigiComp2.1/4.2 level 3)

**COMPETENCE AREA 5: PROBLEM SOLVING**

**5.1 SOLVING TECHNICAL PROBLEMS**

-   Can identify technical problems when operating devices and using
    digital environments, and are aware of specific project
    guidelines, forum and blogs for problem solution as a basis to
    address problems when operating in digital infrastructures (from
    trouble-shooting to solving more complex problems). e.g. be able
    to use Epidoc Guidelines, Forum, Blogs for problem solutions.
    (DigComp2.1/5.1 level 4/5).

**5.2 IDENTIFYING NEEDS AND TECHNOLOGICAL RESPONSES**

-   Can assess needs and identify, evaluate, select and use digital
    tools and possible technological responses and to solve them. Can
    compare and connect different solutions to the same problem To
    adjust and customise digital environments to personal needs (e.g.
    accessibility). Are able to design a project based on EpiDoc and
    EFES, adjust EFES to project needs. Can improve relations among
    different fields of study (epigraphy, philology, archaeology,
    linguistics), methods and tools of the digital domain
    (DigComp2.1/5.2 level 4/5).

**5.3 CREATIVELY USING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES**

-   Can use digital tools and technologies to create knowledge and to
    innovate processes and products. To engage individually and
    collectively in cognitive processing to understand and resolve
    conceptual problems and problem situations in digital environments
    (DigComp2.1/5.3 level 4/5).

**5.4 IDENTIFYING DIGITAL COMPETENCE GAPS**

-   Can understand where one’s own digital competence needs to be
    improved or updated. To be able to support others with their
    digital competence development. To seek opportunities for
    self-development (DigComp2.1/5.4 level 4/5).

**Resources:**

**CALOHEE** *Measuring and Comparing Achievements of Learning Outcomes
in Europe* - *Guidelines and Reference Points*
\[[<u>https://www.calohee.eu/</u>](https://www.calohee.eu/)\]

**DigComp.** *The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens* 2.2
version. URI:
[<u>https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415</u>](https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415)
DOI: [<u>10.2760/115376
(online)</u>](https://dx.doi.org/10.2760/115376), <u>[10.2760/490274
(print)](https://dx.doi.org/10.2760/490274)</u>

## Bibliography

Bodard, Gabriel and Stoyanova, Simona. "Epigraphers and
Encoders: Strategies for Teaching and Learning Digital Epigraphy". In *Digital Classics Outside the Echo-Chamber:
Teaching, Knowledge Exchange & Public Engagement*, edited by M.
Romanello and G. Bodard, 51-68. London: Ubiquity Press, 2016.

Parker, Heather D.D. and Rollston, Christopher A. "Teaching
Epigraphy in the Digital Age". In *Ancient Manuscripts in Digital Culture. Visualisation,
Data Mining, Communication*, edited by D. Hamidović, C. Clivaz S. Bowen
Savant, 189-216. E-Book: Brill, 2019.

Salvaterra, Carla, Bencivenni, Alice, Fogagnolo, Marta, Gheldof, Tom and Vagionakis Irene. 
"ENCODE4OpenU and the Preparation and Delivery of an International
Collaborative MOOC: A Preliminary Analysis of its Pedagogical and
Technical Implementation". *Educ. Sci.* 13, no. 1, 43 (2023):
[<u>https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13010043</u>](https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13010043)

Wagenaar, Robert. *Tuning-CALOHEE assessment reference
frameworks for civil engineering, teacher education, history, nursing,
physics*. International Tuning Academy, 2018:
[<u>https://repositorio-aberto.up.pt/handle/10216/118864</u>](https://repositorio-aberto.up.pt/handle/10216/118864)
