---
layout: page
title: ENCODE Database
permalink: /database/
show_sidebar: false
menubar: menu
toc: true
toc_title: ENCODE Database
hero_height: is-small
---

**2.1. Description of the ENCODE Database and the ENCODE
teaching modules**

The ENCODE database is designed to contain innovative and customisable
teaching modules, both basic and advanced, aimed at promoting digital
education in the field of ancient writings and scripts and enhancing
participatory and intercultural approaches to cultural heritage. It is
especially designed for teachers who can reuse the modules in different
training and teaching contexts or take inspiration from their design and
contents, but also for students who want to acquire digital competences
for work or academic purposes or orient themselves in choosing training
activities that enable them to develop these competences.

At the basis of the database is the design of a vocabulary for the
identification of digital competences and the areas in which they are
acquired, which guarantees a standard structure for the classification
of the modules themselves: the same reference frameworks were used for
the competence questionnaires and open badges distributed to
participants at the end of the workshops organised by the project as
registered in the descriptions of the [<u>ENCODE Learning Outcomes and
Competences</u>](https://site.unibo.it/encode/en/training-events). On
the classification of competences and areas of competence acquisition,
<span class="mark">see 2.2. How we build the competences.</span>

The database can be search either by browsing the individual sections on
modules, competences and areas of competence acquisition (the pages *All
modules*, *All competences*, *All focuses*), or through the *Search*
page, which includes a search mask in which one can search by textual
strings or use facets combining different parameters such as course
format, competences, incoming and outgoing levels, focuses, authors or
responsible institutions.

There are three types of entries:

-   course sessions for which online material is freely available (e.g.
    [<u>Module 79 Trismegistos workshop on Ancient World
    texts</u>](https://encode.uni-hamburg.de/modules/m79))

-   courses for which the link points to the programme or syllabus on
    specific websites (e.g. [<u>Module 46 ENCODE DGLE Workshop
    2021</u>](https://encode.uni-hamburg.de/modules/m46))

-   courses that bring together the different sessions for each of which
    a module has been created (e.g. [<u>Module 78 ENCODE Workshop
    Multilingual and Multicultural Digital Infrastructures for Ancient
    Written Artefacts</u>](https://encode.uni-hamburg.de/modules/m78))

The individual module pages are structured in different sections, which
contain basic information such as the title, author and institution
providing the module, the licence under which the material is made
available, a brief description of the module itself, its format,
language, skills and level attained and, if possible, a link to the
teaching material (if available online) or to the course (intensive
programmes or regular academic courses) programme. The material often
consists of slides or video tutorials, but sometimes the links point to
programmes or syllabi on specifically dedicated websites. In fact, the
modules also include courses whose material is not available online, as
even the content structure or syllabus of a course can be inspirational
or provide a model for teachers who want to plan a training activity
focusing on a specific topic. Precisely in connection with this need, it
has been decided to include in the description of the modules
information such as the date, the format and the medium. Some modules
are grouped under larger modules describing the course or workshop in
which the individual sessions were held: a section in the individual
modules provides a link which points to such larger modules that gives
details about the organisation of the whole course.

**Bibliography**

Bencivenni, Fogagnolo 2023: A. Bencivenni, M. Fogagnolo, *Bridging the
&lt;gap&gt;: il progetto ENCODE e l’epigrafia digitale*, in *Scienze
dell’Antichità* 29/2 (2023), *forthcoming*.

Elagina 2021: D. Elagina, *Modelling Vocabulary of Digital Competencies
for the Project ENCODE*, Digital Classicist London 2021 (23th July
2021):
[<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I8cQAkGEJRY&t=124s</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I8cQAkGEJRY&t=124s).
