---
layout: page
title: EpiDOC
permalink: /epidoc/
show_sidebar: false
toc: true
menubar: menu
toc_title: EpiDoc
hero_height: is-small
---


**3.2.1 Guidelines EpiDoc Guidelines**

The [<u>EpiDoc Guidelines</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/) are a
tool produced by the EpiDoc Community that suggests recommendations for
encoding scholarly and educational editions of ancient documents. They
contain accurate descriptions of the textual, descriptive, and other
features expressed with EpiDoc and the corresponding TEI elements,
attributes and values used to encode them.

The Guidelines are the result of a collaborative effort and, as such,
are constantly implemented: the current version is 9.4. Because of its
practical function, the Guidelines are built on examples of ongoing
projects based on EpiDoc: corrections and additions to the Guidelines
are made possible thanks to the discussion among community members via
the [<u>Markup List</u>](https://lsv.uky.edu/archives/markup.html), used
by the Community to discuss questions of content, method, development
and practice. The responsibility of every section is also indicated at
the bottom of each page.

The EpiDoc Guidelines Homepage is structured as follows:

1.  The first section ‘Browse Guidelines’ collects different pages,
    among which a guide about how to use the EpiDoc Guidelines
    ([<u>How to use the EpiDoc
    Guidelines</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/intro-intro.html)),
    an [<u>Overview of EpiDoc
    structure</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/supp-structure.html),
    which contains the EpiDoc template and a prose description of the
    different sections of the template, and a page [<u>EpiDoc homepage
    on SourceForge</u>](https://sourceforge.net/p/epidoc/wiki/Home/),
   which points to the main EpiDoc website.

2.  The section ‘Tables of contents by transcription style’ aligns
    > guidelines of specific projects or transcription styles to the
    > general EpiDoc Guidelines. For transcriptional features, in fact,
    > the EpiDoc markup is based on the Leiden Conventions, which are
    > rendered by the EpiDoc Example Stylesheets in Leiden and in its
    > different transcription styles depending on the ancient documents
    > edited (Greek and Latin inscriptions and papyri, Egyptian
    > documents, Mycenaean tablets...).

3.  The following section of the Guidelines ‘Thematic lists of
    > guidelines pages’, contains the description of all the elements
    > used for the markup of the text, of the metadata, for the
    > insertion of images and for the semantic markup for indexing and
    > searching purposes. The page [<u>Descriptive and historical
    > data</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/app-allsupp.html)
    > collects information about the metadata (description of the
    > text-bearing object and its ancient and modern history), how to
    > build an apparatus, how to provide a translation of the text into
    > modern languages and how to write a commentary and a bibliography.
    > Information about how to encode features of the text itself and to
    > express editorial interventions (supplementation, regularization,
    > interpretation of numerals…) is provided by the [<u>Text
    > Transcription</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/app-alltrans.html)
    > page. A third page [<u>Images and
    > Figures</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/supp-images.html)
    > provides recommendations about how to make reference to
    > photographs, drawings and images of squeezes. The last page
    > [<u>Vocabularies and Indexing
    > Terms</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/app-allidx.html)
    > offers guidelines about how to encode semantically relevant
    > information in the text, such as personal names, geographical
    > names, titles and offices, but also how to index elements from the
    > metadata and how to use external or internal authority lists,
    > taxonomies, vocabularies to classify and standardize terms.
    > Individual pages are organised by epigraphic or papyrological
    > concept, rather than by TEI element name, but sometimes it can be
    > difficult to browse this section: a useful tool, therefore, is
    > also the search mask in the top left corner, which allows a more
    > immediate search. This is the most important section for the
    > EpiDoc encoder. Each page of this section contains in the upper
    > left corner a little box with a link to the corresponding TEI
    > Guidelines with further explanation of the element taken into
    > account. In the main body is a text with a description of how to
    > use the specific element according to the EpiDoc Guidelines and
    > examples showing real cases in which the element has been used in
    > ongoing projects and how this feature is expressed in different
    > transcription styles. These examples are useful to show how from a
    > single XML input multiple outputs can be obtained depending on the
    > project’s specific needs. At the bottom of the page, there are
    > links to other pages in which the element is also mentioned.

4.  The section ‘Appendices’ contains a [<u>Gentle Introduction to
    > Mark-Up for
    > Epigraphers</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/intro-eps.html)
    > page, in which the history of EpiDoc and the advantages of the
    > semantic markup are recalled, a
    > [<u>Glossary</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/app-glossary.html)
    > of important terms and an [<u>Index of TEI
    > elements</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/app-elements.html)
    > used in EpiDoc.

5.  In the last section ‘Externally maintained guidelines for
    > specialized communities’ are some useful tools for training, such
    > as the [<u>EpiDoc Leiden
    > Cheatsheet</u>](https://svn.code.sf.net/p/epidoc/code/trunk/guidelines/msword/cheatsheet.pdf)
    > and [<u>EpiDoc Structure
    > Cheatsheet</u>](https://svn.code.sf.net/p/epidoc/code/trunk/guidelines/msword/structure-cheatsheet.pdf),
    > two pdf files with a list of the main transcriptional features
    > alongside the Leiden symbols and the corresponding EpiDoc element
    > to encode them and a template followed by a table with
    > explanations about single sections respectively. Moreover, this
    > section has links which point to external Guidelines but specific
    > to projects based on EpiDoc, such as Digital Fragmenta
    > Historicorum Graecorum, InsAph, InsLib, IOSPE...

In addition to the Guidelines, the EpiDoc Community provides other
tools, such as the aforementioned homepage on SourceForge, which
contains the reference to the EpiDoc Schema, the EpiDoc Reference
Styles, the link to the Markup List and the sections Request Features
and Report Bugs, where community members can request additional features
or simply report problems. Additional tools can also be found on the
EpiDoc GitHub page with EpiDoc tutorials, training materials and
information on EpiDoc workshops. Moreover, EpiDoc has a page on The
Digital Classicist Wiki, with links to projects, tools and other
resources related to the EpiDoc community.

**Resources:**

EpiDoc Guidelines 9.4:
[<u>https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/</u>](https://epidoc.stoa.org/gl/latest/)

EpiDoc on SourceForge:
[<u>https://sourceforge.net/p/epidoc/wiki/Home/</u>](https://sourceforge.net/p/epidoc/wiki/Home/)

GitHub page on EpiDoc:
[<u>https://github.com/EpiDoc/</u>](https://github.com/EpiDoc/)

EpiDoc on Digital Classicist:
[<u>https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/EpiDoc</u>](https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/EpiDoc)

**Bibliography:**

Vagionakis 2021: I. Vagionakis, *EpiDoc Tutorial: Introduction to EpiDoc
Guidelines*:
[<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK8S-olT34k</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK8S-olT34k)
