---
layout: page
title: Programming Historian
permalink: /prog_hist/
show_sidebar: false
menubar: menu
toc: true
toc_title: Programming Historian
hero_height: is-small
---

*Programming Historian* was founded in 2008 by William J. Turkel and
Alan MacEachern. Turkel published [a blog
post](http://digitalhistoryhacks.blogspot.com/2008/01/programming-historian.html) at
the time, setting out their intentions for the project. Initially it
focused on the Python programming language and was published in open
access.

In 2012, *Programming Historian* expanded its editorial team and
was launched as an open access peer reviewed scholarly journal of
methodology for digital historians. In 2016, a Spanish Language
publication was added to the initial English-language publication and in
2017 translated lessons started being publishing under the
title [*Programming Historian en
español*](https://programminghistorian.org/es). In 2018, a French
language publication was added, anticipating the launch of *[Programming
Historian en français](https://programminghistorian.org/fr),* in 2019. A
year later, a Portuguese-speaking team was also created, launching
[*Programming Historian em
português*](https://programminghistorian.org/pt) in early 2021.

Since the beginning, the aim of the project has been to teach the usage
of such technologies to classicists, unfamiliar to programming
languages. Programming Historian offers introductory lessons on
different programs or programming languages such as Python, R, MySQL,
SPARQL and others, among them Jupyter Notebooks, GitHub pages,
OpenRefine and many others.

All tutorials at *Programming Historian* are peer reviewed, guided
through the review process by one of the editors. The review involves a
thorough exchange with the lesson editor to ensure the lesson works as
intended and that all concepts are explained for a non-specialist reader
before the tutorial is sent to external reviewers.

The review process is an integral component of a collaborative effort
for scholars to teach and learn from each other. Once a tutorial slips
into the [editorial
workflow](https://programminghistorian.org/author-guidelines), the team
does everything to make sure the tutorial becomes as useful as possible
and published in a reasonable amount of time (cfr. [Reviewer
Guidelines](https://programminghistorian.org/reviewer-guidelines)
section for more information).

The *Programming Historian* team is committed to open-source values. All
contributed lessons make use of open-source programming languages and
software. This policy is meant to minimize costs for all parties, and to
allow the greatest possible level of participation. Since 2016, a
citable version of the *Programming Historian* project has been
deposited on Zenodo.

All submissions to *Programming Historian* are published under
a [Creative Commons 'CC-BY'
license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en). This
adheres to a '[Diamond](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.6900566.v1)'
open access model of publishing. The version of record is made freely
available without subscription fee or restrictions on access. Authors
are permitted to republish their tutorials anywhere, as can anyone, as
long as they cite the original author and respect his or her moral
rights.

### Structure

By accessing the [main page](https://programminghistorian.org/), it is,
first of all, possible to select the language among the four possible
ones (English, Spanish, French, Portuguese).

From this page, it is also possible to have access to the six different
sections of the site, named as follows:

-"[About](https://programminghistorian.org/en/about)", cointaining
information related to the history of the project and its policies.

-"[Contribute](https://programminghistorian.org/en/contribute)", giving
access to a drop-down menu from which anyone can access the guidelines
to review, write, translate or edit e lesson: everyone can contribute to
PH by writing a new lesson, editing or translating an existing lesson or
by providing feedback and making suggestions.

-"[Lessons](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/)", the core of
*Programming Historian*: this section gives access to a searchable
"Lesson Index"; the lessons are organized by general topics, but buttons
can also be used to filter by category.

-"[Events](https://programminghistorian.org/en/events)", displaying the
program of upcoming and past events (some are available online through a
YouTube link): in 2022, the PH team launched a program of in-house,
multilingual events to support educators, learners and project partners.

-"[Support Us](https://programminghistorian.org/en/ipp)", illustrating
the institutional or individual supporters of the project and how to
become a partner.

-"[Blog](https://programminghistorian.org/blog/)": The Programming
Historian Blog is a space to share news about the project, ideas for how
someone might use technology in his own works and examples of the PH
applied in real life.

The Programming Historians has won multiple awards which recognize and
celebrate its achievements in the spheres of open access publishing and
digital scholarship.

The PH team is committed to diversity, a policy designed also to ensure
that the project continues to benefit from diverse viewpoints.

This project is hosted also on
[GitHub](https://github.com/programminghistorian/jekyll).
