**3.3.3 SunoikisisDC – Sunoikisis Digital Classics**

Sunoikisis Digital Classics was created in 2015 as an international
consortium developed by the Alexander von Humboldt Chair of Digital
Humanities at the University of Leipzig in collaboration with the
Harvard Center for Hellenic Studies, later joined by the Institute of
Classical Studies in London.

Since the beginning, the aim of the programme has been to teach digital
humanities and technologies for the study and learning of ancient
languages and addresses especially students of Computer Science and
Humanities from different backgrounds.

In recent years, the consortium has expanded to now include instructors
and students from over 90 institutions, thanks to the open technologies
it uses to stream lectures and share material. The courses are in fact
online and open to students from all over the world. Students from the
University of Leipzig and other partner institutions can be assessed and
receive credit, but every teacher can integrate the courses into their
own syllabus. Following the principles of Open Access and Open
Education, SunoikisisDC brings together scholars with different
interests and expertise to teach online courses in weekly sessions and
offers a class outline with course descriptions, bibliography,
exercises, other resources and a YouTube link to the class.

SunokisisDC has a [<u>GitHub</u>](https://sunoikisisdc.github.io/) page
that collects syllabi and course materials from 2015 up to the most
recent ones, a SunoikisisDC [<u>YouTube
channel</u>](https://www.youtube.com/@sunoikisisdc2110) that provides
streaming and contains video recordings of the courses, a
[<u>SunoikisisDC Zotero Group
Library</u>](https://www.zotero.org/groups/4303839/sunoikisisdc), which
collects the bibliographic and digital resources from the SunoikisisDC
sessions (and
[<u>Guidelines</u>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JxndqMu7vZ3uMV27FljP8Lq3bffvaWAO72bEKlp35As/edit#heading=h.pvj7mzjykpfw)
for future editors of the SunoikisisDC Zotero Group Library), and a
[<u>Google
Spreadsheet</u>](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VAYHnhMEFfR0npgrYDjm6_AmLzmqDZFPhEHzJcAGQB8/edit),
which collects all the sessions of the programme since its beginning and
allows the search for specific sessions, topics and convenors.

Courses are scheduled for 3 terms per year: speakers and convenors
usually cover several different topics (text encoding, 3D modelling,
imaging and reconstruction, treebanks and linguistic annotation...) with
presentation of projects based on these technologies, but in recent
years the Spring Term has always been dedicated to digital approaches to
Cultural Heritage. Each course is structured in a programme and
accompanied by a list of introductory readings. The page for each
session includes information about the event and convenors, the YouTube
link and a link to the slides, together with the class outline,
readings, other useful resources and exercises. Sessions last 90 minutes
and the teachers’ presentations are followed by questions from the
convenors and the audience, who can interact via a real-time chat.

**Resources:**

SunoikisisDC main website:
[<u>https://sunoikisisdc.github.io/</u>](https://sunoikisisdc.github.io/)

SunoikisisDC Zotero Group Library:
[<u>https://www.zotero.org/groups/4303839/sunoikisisdc</u>](https://www.zotero.org/groups/4303839/sunoikisisdc)

Guidelines for future editors of the SunoikisisDC Zotero Group Library:
[<u>https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JxndqMu7vZ3uMV27FljP8Lq3bffvaWAO72bEKlp35As/edit#heading=h.pvj7mzjykpfw</u>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JxndqMu7vZ3uMV27FljP8Lq3bffvaWAO72bEKlp35As/edit#heading=h.pvj7mzjykpfw)

Google Spreadsheet of the SunoikisisDC Sessions:
[<u>https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VAYHnhMEFfR0npgrYDjm6\_AmLzmqDZFPhEHzJcAGQB8/edit</u>](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VAYHnhMEFfR0npgrYDjm6_AmLzmqDZFPhEHzJcAGQB8/edit)

SunoikisisDC YouTube channel:
[<u>https://www.youtube.com/@sunoikisisdc2110</u>](https://www.youtube.com/@sunoikisisdc2110)

**Bibliography:**

Berti 2015, M. Berti, *Sunoikisis DC - An International Consortium of
Digital Classics Programmes*, Digital Classicist London seminar (July
10, 2015). Available at:
[<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zpBR0bb8gxk</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zpBR0bb8gxk)
